Chapter one

Elisa

HAVANA, 1959

“How long will we be gone?” my sister Maria asks.

“Awhile,” I answer.

“Two months? Six months? A year? Two?”

“Quiet.” I nudge her forward, my gaze darting around the departure area of Rancho-Boyeros Airport to see
if anyone has overheard her question.

We stand in a row, the famous—or infamous, depending on who you ask—Perez sisters. Isabel leads the
way, the eldest of the group. She doesn’t speak, her gaze trained on her fiancé, Alberto. His face is pale as
he watches us, as we march out of the city we once brought to its knees.

Beatriz is next. When she walks, the hem of her finest dress swinging against her calves, the pale blue
fabric adorned with lace, it’s as though the entire airport holds its collective breath. She’s the beauty in the
family and she knows it.

I trail behind her, the knees beneath my skirts quivering, each step a weighty effort.

And then there’s Maria, the last of the sugar queens.

At thirteen, Maria’s too young to understand the need to keep her voice low, is able to disregard the
soldiers standing in green uniforms, guns slung over their shoulders and perched in their eager hands. She
knows the danger those uniforms bring, but not as well as the rest of us do. We haven’t been able to
remove the grief that has swept our family in its unrelenting curl, but we’ve done our best to shield her
from the barbarity we’ve endured. She hasn’t heard the cries of the prisoners held in cages like animals in
La Cabaña, the prison now run by that Argentine monster. She hasn’t watched Cuban blood spill on the
ground.

But our father has.

He turns and silences her with a look, one he rarely employs yet is supremely effective. For most of our
lives, he’s left the care of his daughters to our mother and our nanny, Magda, too busy running his sugar
company and playing politics. But these are extraordinary times, the stakes higher than any we’ve ever
faced. There is nothing Fidel would love more than to make an example of Emilio Perez and his family—the
quintessential image of everything his revolution seeks to destroy. We’re not the wealthiest family in Cuba,
or the most powerful one, but the close relationship between my father and the former president is
impossible to ignore. Even the careless words of a thirteen-year-old girl can prove deadly in this climate.

Maria falls silent.

Our mother walks beside our father, her head held high. She insisted we wear our finest dresses today,
hats and gloves, brushed our hair until it gleamed. It wouldn’t do for her daughters to look anything but
their best, even in exile.

Defiant in defeat.

We might not have fought in the mountains, haven’t held weapons in our glove-covered hands, but there is
a battle in all of us. One Fidel has ignited like a flame that will never be extinguished. And so we walk
toward the gate in our favorite dresses, Cuban pride and pragmatism on full display. It’s our way of taking
the gowns with us, even if they’re missing the jewels that normally adorn them. What remains of our
jewelry is buried in the backyard of our home.

For when we return.

To be Cuban is to be proud—it is both our greatest gift and our biggest curse. We serve no kings, bow no
heads, bear our troubles on our backs as though they are nothing at all. There is an art to this, you see. An
art to appearing as though everything is effortless, that your world is a gilded one, when the reality is that
your knees beneath your silk gown buckle from the weight of it all. We are silk and lace, and beneath them
we are steel.

We try to preserve the fiction that this is merely a vacation, a short trip abroad, but the gazes following us
around the airport know better—

Beatriz’s fingers wrap around mine for one blissful moment. Those olive green–clad sentries watch our
every move. There’s something reassuring in her fear, in that crack in the facade. I don’t let go.

The world as we know it has died, and I do not recognize the one that has taken its place.

A sense of hopelessness overpowers the departure area. You see it in the eyes of the men and women
waiting to board the plane, in the tired set of their shoulders, the shock etched across their faces, their
possessions clutched in their hands. It’s present in the somber children, their laughter extinguished by the
miasma that has overtaken all of us.

This used to be a happy place. We would welcome our father when he returned from a business trip, sat in
these same seats three years earlier, full of excitement to travel to New York on vacation.

We take our seats, huddling together, Beatriz on one side of me, Maria on the other. Isabel sits apart from
us, her pain a mantle around her shoulders. There are different degrees of loss here, the weight of what we
leave behind inescapable.

My parents sit with their fingers intertwined, one of the rare displays of physical affection I’ve ever seen
them partake in, worry in their eyes, grief in their hearts.

How long will we be gone? When will we return? Which version of Cuba will greet us when we do?

We’ve been here for hours now, the seconds creeping by with interminable slowness. My dress itches, a
thin line of sweat running down my neck. Nausea rolls around in my stomach, an acrid taste in my mouth.

“I’m going to be sick,” I murmur to Beatriz.

She squeezes my fingers. “No, you’re not. We’re almost there.”

I beat the nausea back, staring down at the ground in front of me. The weight of the stares is pointed and
sharp, and at the same time, it’s as if we exist in a vacuum. The sound has been sucked from the room save
for the occasional rustle of clothing, the stray sob. We exist in a state of purgatory, waiting, waiting—

“Now boarding . . .”

My father rises from his seat on creaky limbs; he’s aged years in the nearly two months since President
Batista fled the country, since the winds of revolution drifted from the Sierra Maestra to our corner of the
island. Emilio Perez was once revered as one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in Cuba; now there’s
little to distinguish my father from the man sitting across the aisle, from the gentleman lining up at the
gate. We’re all citizens of no country now, all orphans of circumstance.

I reach out and take Maria’s hand with my spare one.

She’s silent, as though reality has finally sunk in. We all are.

We walk in a line, somber and reticent, making our way onto the tarmac. There’s no breeze in the air today,
the heat overpowering as we shuffle forward, the sun beating down on our backs, the plane looming in
front of us.

I can’t do this. I can’t leave. I can’t stay.

Beatriz pulls me forward, a line of Perez girls, and I continue on.

We board the plane in an awkward shuffle, the silence cracking and splintering as hushed voices give way
to louder ones, a cacophony of tears filling the cabin. Wails. Now that we’ve escaped the departure area,
the veneer of civility is stripped away to something unvarnished and raw—

Mourning.

I take a seat next to the window, peering out the tiny glass, hoping for a better view than that of the airport
terminal, hoping . . .

We roll back from the gate with a jolt and lurch, silence descending in the cabin. In a flash, it’s New Year’s
Eve again and I’m standing in the ballroom of my parents’ friends’ house, a glass of champagne in one
hand. I’m laughing, my heart so full. There’s fear lingering in the background, both fear and uncertainty, but
there’s also a sense of hope.

In minutes, my entire world changed.

President Batista has fled the country! Long live a free Cuba!

Is this freedom?

We’re gaining speed now, hurtling down the runway. My body heaves with the movement, and I lose the
battle, grabbing the bag in the seat pocket in front of me, emptying the contents of my stomach.

Beatriz strokes my back as I hunch over, as the wheels leave the ground, as we soar into the sky. The
nausea hits me again and again, an ignominious parting gift, and when I finally look up, a startling shock of
blue and green greets me, an artist’s palette beneath me.

When Christopher Columbus arrived in Cuba, he described it as the most beautiful land human eyes had
ever seen. And it is. But there’s more beyond the sea, the mountains, the clear sky. There’s so much more
that we leave behind us.

How long will we be gone?

A year? Two?

Ojalá.

Marisol

JANUARY 2017

When I was younger, I begged my grandmother to tell me about Cuba. It was a mythical island, contained in
my heart, entirely drawn from the version of Cuba she created in exile in Miami and the stories she shared
with me. I was caught between two lands—two iterations of myself—the one I inhabited in my body and
the one I lived in my dreams.

We’d sit in the living room of my grandparents’ sprawling house in Coral Gables, and she’d show me old
photos that had been smuggled out of the country by intrepid family members, weaving tales about her life
in Havana, the adventures of her siblings, painting a portrait of a land that existed in my imagination. Her
stories smelled of gardenias and jasmine, tasted of plantains and mamey, and always, the sound of her old
record player. Each time she’d finish her tale she’d smile and promise I would see it myself one day, that
we’d return in grand style, reopening her family’s seaside estate in Varadero and the elegant home that
took up nearly the entire block of a tree-lined street in Havana.

When Fidel dies, we’ll return. You’ll see.

And finally, after nearly sixty years of keeping Cubans in suspense, of false alarms and hoaxes, he did die,
outlasting my grandmother by mere months. The night he died, my family opened a bottle of champagne
my great-grandfather had bought nearly sixty years ago for such an occasion, toasting Castro’s demise in
our inimitable fashion. The champagne, sadly, like Fidel himself, was past its prime, but we partied on Calle
Ocho in Miami until the sun rose, and still—

Still we remain.

His death did not erase nearly sixty years of exile, or ensure a future of freedom. Instead I’m smuggling my
grandmother’s ashes inside my suitcase, concealed as jars in my makeup case, honoring her last request to
me while we pray, hope, wait for things to change.